Meet-In-The-Middle Search
===========

3.x  Purpose

Some planning problems resist direct solution.  A forward search from the
start state may face a combinatorial explosion where no heuristic or
intermediate subgoal is powerful enough to guide the solver toward the
goal within a reasonable depth cutoff.  When standard techniques
fail because heuristics cannot rank states effectively, and no obvious intermediate subgoal suggests itself, the
enumerator offers an alternative Wouldwork problem-solving capability.
But the user has to supplement the usual problem specification with an additional
section that tells the enumerator how to generate candidate goal states.

The enumerator implements a meet-in-the-middle approach.  Instead of
searching forward from start to goal, it first works backward from the goal.
It initially enumerates all states that could satisfy the goal condition, then it
expands those states backward through predecessor layers, building a
reachable set of states known to be a fixed number of actions away from
the goal.  The forward solver then only needs to reach any state in this
reachable set, a typically much shallower search.  The full solution then
consists of the two-part (forward + backward) path to the goal.  But note that
either forward search or backward enumeration can still be intractable.  Experimentation 
is the best way to find out.


3.x  Base vs Derived Relations

[A description/definition of base and derived relations. User has to specify which relations
are base relations.]


3.x  Method

The enumerator uses CSP (constraint satisfaction) techniques to
systematically generate candidate goal states.  It requires the user to
declare which relations constitute the *base* of the problem—-the
independently assignable variables whose values, once fixed, determine
the complete state, which propagation can then fill out with derived relations.

For example, in a puzzle involving an agent, movable connectors, and
pairable devices, the base relations might be the location of each object
(a fluent assignment—each object gets exactly one location or is held)
and the pairing of connectors to devices (a subset assignment—each
connector can be paired with zero or more partners).  All other derived
relations—beam paths, active receivers, colors—are computed
automatically by the problem's propagation function once the base is
fixed.

The enumerator converts these base-relation declarations into a sequence
of CSP branching actions, then uses the WouldWork solver in tree/CSP
mode to search through all possible assignments.  At each leaf it
propagates the base assignment into a full state and tests the goal
condition.  States that pass become the *enumerated goal states*.

Several pruning mechanisms keep the enumeration tractable:

  * Symmetry detection — Objects that are interchangeable (identical
    static-relation signatures not mentioned in the goal) are assigned
    canonical orderings, eliminating redundant permutations.

  * Goal-fixed constraints — When the goal pins a base-relation value
    (e.g., the agent must be at area4), the enumerator prunes all
    branches that contradict it.

  * User-declared constraints — The :REQUIRES option on a base relation
    lets the user specify feasibility predicates (e.g., paired connectors
    must have a location assigned; symmetric pairings are excluded).

  * Cardinality caps — :MAX-PER limits how many partners a key can have
    in a subset relation.  :MAX-UNASSIGNED limits how many keys of a
    given type may remain unassigned.

  * Base filters — A define-base-filter declaration provides a predicate
    over the base state (before propagation) that prunes infeasible
    combinations early.


3.x  Specification

To use the enumerator, the problem spec must include declarations that
tell the enumerator which relations form the independently assignable
base of the state.  These declarations are placed in the problem file,
typically at the end, after the standard define-action, define-query, and
define-update forms.  Three declaration forms are available:
define-base-relation (required), define-base-filter (optional), and the
state-feasible? query (optional).

In addition, the problem must define a propagate-changes! update that
derives all non-base relations from the base.  This is not specific to
the enumerator—many problems already define it for use in action
effects—but the enumerator depends on it to complete partial base
assignments into full states.


define-base-relation

  (define-base-relation relation-spec &rest keys)

Declares a relation as part of the enumeration base and supplies
metadata controlling how its values are generated.  Declaration order
matters: the enumerator processes base relations in the order they are
declared, so relations that constrain others should be declared first.

RELATION-SPEC is either a bare relation symbol or a relation symbol
with named argument variables:

  (define-base-relation loc ...)                      ;bare symbol
  (define-base-relation (paired ?connector ?terminus) ;with arg names
    ...)

The argument-variable form is required for the :MAX-PER and :REQUIRES
options, which reference specific argument positions.

The enumerator automatically infers the assignment pattern from the
relation's declaration:

  :FLUENT pattern — Relations with one or more fluent positions (declared
    via define-dynamic-relations with a $ position).  Each key object
    receives exactly one value.  Example: (loc connector1 area2), where
    area2 is the fluent value assigned to key connector1.

  :SUBSET pattern — Relations with no fluent positions.  Each key object
    receives a subset of possible partners (zero or more).  Example:
    (paired connector1 receiver2), representing one element of
    connector1's partner set.

The pattern can be overridden with the :PATTERN key, but this is rarely
needed.

Metadata keys:

  :ALLOW-UNASSIGNED  T | (:TYPES type...)

    For fluent-pattern relations, specifies which keys may be left
    without a value (represented internally as :UNASSIGNED).  This is
    useful when some objects legitimately have no assignment in a goal
    state—for example, a cargo object that is being held has no
    location.

    T means all keys may be unassigned.  (:TYPES cargo) means only keys
    of type cargo may be unassigned.

    Example:
      :allow-unassigned (:types cargo)

  :MAX-UNASSIGNED  (:TYPES type... positive-integer)

    Caps how many keys of the listed types may simultaneously be
    unassigned.  Used together with :ALLOW-UNASSIGNED to prevent
    generating states where too many objects lack values.

    Example:
      :max-unassigned (:types cargo 1)    ;at most one cargo held

  :EARLY-KEYS  (:TYPES type...)

    Specifies key types to enumerate first, before other keys of the
    same relation.  Assigning these keys early provides better pruning
    because their values constrain subsequent branches.

    Example:
      :early-keys (:types agent)          ;assign agent location first

  :MAX-PER  (?arg positive-integer)

    For subset-pattern relations, caps the number of partners that can
    be assigned to each key.  Requires the relation-spec form with named
    argument variables; ?arg must be the first argument.

    Example:
      :max-per (?connector 3)             ;each connector paired with at most 3

  :REQUIRES  form

    A feasibility predicate over the relation's arguments, written in
    the WouldWork query DSL (the same syntax used in define-query).  For
    subset-pattern relations, evaluated for each candidate (key, partner)
    pair.  When it returns NIL, that pairing is pruned.  The predicate
    can reference the current partial state via BIND lookups.

    Example:
      :requires (and (bind (loc ?connector $area))    ;connector must have location
                     (not (paired ?terminus ?connector))) ;no symmetric pair

  :ON-ASSIGN  ((relation value) ...)

    When a key receives a value, automatically assert default values for
    other relations.  Useful for setting derived defaults that simplify
    the search space.

  :KEY-TYPES  (:TYPES type...)

    For subset-pattern relations, restricts which object types are
    considered as keys.  By default all objects matching the relation's
    first-argument type are used.


define-base-filter

  (define-base-filter name body)

Declares a base-state filter applied before propagation.  The body is
written in the WouldWork query DSL and receives the current base state
(the partial state containing only base-relation assignments, before
propagate-changes! runs).  Return non-NIL to keep the state, NIL to
prune it.

Use this for constraints that cannot be expressed per-relation via
:REQUIRES but that depend on the joint configuration of multiple base
relations.  For example, requiring that the agent be at a specific area
AND that specific connectors be in specific areas simultaneously:

  (define-base-filter filter-constraints
    (and (loc agent1 area4)
         (exists ((?c-blue ?c-red ?c-other) connector)
           (and (loc ?c-blue area2)
                (loc ?c-red area3)
                (or (loc ?c-other area1)
                    (loc ?c-other area4)
                    (not (bind (loc ?c-other $x))))
                (paired ?c-blue transmitter2)
                (paired ?c-blue receiver3)
                (paired ?c-red transmitter1)
                (paired ?c-red receiver2)))))

The filter is compiled once and applied at every leaf of the CSP search,
so it should be as selective as possible.  Only one define-base-filter
is allowed per problem; multiple constraints should be combined with AND
inside a single filter.

The installed filter is used automatically by find-goal-states (via the
default :PREFILTER :USE-INSTALLED).  It can be overridden at the REPL
by passing :PREFILTER NIL or a different function.


state-feasible?

  (define-query state-feasible? ()
    body)

An optional query that acts as a general-purpose physical-reachability
filter.  When defined, the enumerator calls it on every candidate state
(both during find-goal-states and during find-predecessors) to check
whether the state could plausibly be reached from the initial state.

Unlike define-base-filter, which operates on the base state before
propagation, state-feasible? is called on fully propagated states.  It
is appropriate for constraints that depend on derived relations or that
apply to intermediate (non-goal) states during backward expansion.

Example (checking agent accessibility):

  (define-query state-feasible? ()
    (or (not (bind (loc agent1 $area)))          ;no location yet: OK
        (loc agent1 area1)                        ;at start: OK
        (accessible0 area1 $area)                 ;one hop away: OK
        (exists (?zone (either gate blower))
          (accessible1 area1 ?zone $area))))      ;through a gate: OK

If not defined, no feasibility check is applied—all propagated states
are accepted.


propagate-changes!

  (define-update propagate-changes! ()
    body)

This is not an enumerator-specific declaration, but the enumerator
depends on it.  After the enumerator assigns all base-relation values,
it calls propagate-changes! to derive the remaining relations (beam
paths, active status, colors, etc.) from the base.  The update should
iterate to convergence, calling propagation rules repeatedly until no
further changes occur.

If propagate-changes! signals that the state is inconsistent (e.g., via
a kill-switch or convergence failure), the enumerator prunes that
candidate state.

Example:

  (define-update propagate-changes! ()
    (ww-loop for $iteration from 1 to 5
             do (if (not (propagate-consequences!))
                  (return))
             finally (inconsistent-state)))


Choosing base relations

The choice of base relations is the key design decision.  Good base
relations satisfy two criteria:

  1. Independence — Their values can be assigned independently.  Each
     combination of base-relation assignments should represent a
     coherent partial state that propagation can complete.

  2. Completeness — Once all base relations are assigned, propagation
     determines every other relation in the state.  No information is
     lost.

In practice, the base relations are the "degrees of freedom" of the
problem: the variables that the agent's actions directly control.
Derived or computed relations (beam geometry, activation status) should
not be included—they are handled by propagation.

If the number of base-relation combinations is very large, use
:REQUIRES predicates, cardinality caps (:MAX-PER, :MAX-UNASSIGNED),
:EARLY-KEYS for fail-first ordering, and define-base-filter to prune
aggressively.


3.x  Workflow

The enumerator workflow has three steps, each invoked from the REPL after
staging a problem.  Each step builds on the results of the previous one.


Step 1: Enumerate Goal States — find-goal-states

  (find-goal-states)                              ;use the problem's define-goal
  (find-goal-states :solution-type first)         ;stop after the first goal state
  (find-goal-states :solution-type 5)             ;find at most 5 goal states
  (find-goal-states :exclude-relations (active))  ;drop 'active' from the base schema

find-goal-states enumerates all complete base-relation assignments that,
after propagation, satisfy the goal condition.  It produces a report
listing the number of goal states found and interactively displays each
one.

The command defaults to :SOLUTION-TYPE EVERY (find all goal states) and
uses the installed base filter as a prefilter.  The optional positional
argument overrides the goal condition:

  (find-goal-states (and (loc agent1 area4) (active receiver3)))

Results are stored in *ENUMERATED-GOAL-STATES* (a list of problem-state
objects) and also saved for interactive recall:

  (get 'find-goal-states :last-report)

Typical output:

  ;;;; FIND-GOAL-STATES REPORT ;;;;
  Goal: (AND (LOC AGENT1 AREA4) (ACTIVE RECEIVER2) (ACTIVE RECEIVER3))
  Goal states found: 12

  Goal state 1 of 12:
    (ACTIVE RECEIVER2)
    (ACTIVE RECEIVER3)
    (LOC AGENT1 AREA4)
    (LOC CONNECTOR1 AREA2)
    ...
  Show the next goal state of 12? (y or n)


Step 2: Expand Backward from Goals — find-predecessors

  (find-predecessors)                                ;default: forward direction
  (find-predecessors :direction forward)             ;same as default
  (find-predecessors :direction backward)            ;pure backward regression
  (find-predecessors :action-families (move pickup)) ;restrict action types

find-predecessors iteratively expands layers of predecessor states from
the enumerated goal states.  Each layer finds states that are one
additional action away from the goal.  At each completed layer, the
system reports statistics and prompts whether to continue:

  [find-predecessors FORWARD] Starting from reachable set: 12 states.
  [find-predecessors FORWARD] Computing layer 1 from 12 frontier states...
  [find-predecessors FORWARD] Layer 1: 348 raw, 122 feasible, 98 validated,
     87 new unique (99 total). 4.3s.
  Continue to layer 2? (y or n)

When no new states appear (saturation), the search halts automatically:

  [find-predecessors FORWARD] Saturated - no new states at layer 3.
  [find-predecessors FORWARD] Done. *backward-reachable-set* contains 1,500 states.

The :DIRECTION keyword controls how predecessors are generated:

  FORWARD (default) — For each frontier state, generates predecessor
    candidates via per-object CSP enumeration over the action-modified
    base relations, then validates each candidate by applying the action
    forward and checking that it reproduces the target.  This is the
    primary method.

  BACKWARD — Computes predecessors by analytical regression (reversing
    each action).  More direct but requires hand-coded regression rules.

The :ACTION-FAMILIES keyword restricts which action types are considered.
By default, all action families defined in the problem are used.

The reachable set is stored in *BACKWARD-REACHABLE-SET*, a hash table
mapping base-proposition keys to (state . action-path) pairs, where the
action-path records the sequence of actions leading from that state to
the goal.

Interruption is safe: pressing Ctrl-C during a layer preserves all
states from completed layers.


Step 3: Solve via Meeting Point — solve-meeting-point

  (solve-meeting-point)
  (solve-meeting-point :depth-cutoff 12)
  (solve-meeting-point :depth-cutoff 15 :solution-type every)
  (solve-meeting-point :min-backward-depth 2)

solve-meeting-point runs the normal forward solver with an automatically
installed goal test: a state satisfies the "meeting-point goal" if its
base-proposition key appears in the backward reachable set.  When the
forward solver finds a state matching an entry in the reachable set, the
stored backward action path is replayed to extend the solution through
to the original goal.

Parameters:

  :DEPTH-CUTOFF (default 12)
    Maximum depth for the forward search.  This can often be set much
    lower than the depth cutoff needed for a direct start-to-goal
    search, because the forward solver only needs to reach the reachable
    set, not the goal itself.

  :SOLUTION-TYPE (default FIRST)
    Controls how many solutions the forward solver finds before stopping.
    Accepts FIRST, EVERY, or an integer N.

  :MIN-BACKWARD-DEPTH (default: last completed find-predecessors layer)
    Only match against reachable-set entries that are at least this many
    backward steps from the goal.  This prevents the forward solver from
    claiming a "shortcut" that merely re-discovers a shallow goal
    state—it must penetrate at least MIN-BACKWARD-DEPTH steps into the
    backward tree.

After the forward solver completes, solve-meeting-point expands each
meeting-point solution into a full start-to-goal path and stores the
results in *SOLUTIONS* and *UNIQUE-SOLUTIONS*.

  [solve-meeting-point] Expanded 1 meeting-point solution(s) to full goal path(s).


3.x  Results

The enumerator's output integrates with WouldWork's standard solution
infrastructure:

  *SOLUTIONS*           Full start-to-goal solution paths.  After
                        solve-meeting-point, each solution contains the
                        forward prefix (start to meeting point) spliced
                        with the backward suffix (meeting point to goal).

  *UNIQUE-SOLUTIONS*    Deduplicated solutions (one per distinct goal
                        state, keeping the best by the current
                        solution-type metric).

These can be inspected and printed using the same tools as any WouldWork
solution—eg, examining (solution.path (first *solutions*)) to see the
action sequence.

Intermediate results from each stage are also available:

  *ENUMERATED-GOAL-STATES*       Goal states from find-goal-states.

  *BACKWARD-REACHABLE-SET*       Hash table of states reachable from the
                                 goals, keyed by base-proposition key.
                                 Each entry is (state . action-path).

  (get 'find-goal-states :last-report)
                                 Report plist from the last
                                 find-goal-states run, including the goal
                                 form, goal states, and summary counts.

  (get 'find-predecessors :last-report)
                                 Report plist from the last
                                 find-predecessors run, including
                                 direction, completed layer count, and
                                 total reachable count.


3.x  Example: Corner Problem

The Corner problem (problem-corner.lisp) from Talos Principle's
Purgatory workshop illustrates the complete enumerator workflow.  The
problem has an agent, three connectors, two transmitters, three
receivers, and four areas.  The goal is:

  (define-goal
    (and (loc agent1 area4)
         (active receiver2)
         (active receiver3)))

Direct forward search requires a high depth cutoff and explores a large
state space.  The enumerator approach proceeds as follows.

First, declare the base relations and constraints in the problem spec:

  ;;;; ENUMERATOR SPECS ;;;;

  (define-base-relation loc
    :allow-unassigned (:types cargo)
    :max-unassigned (:types cargo 1))

  (define-base-relation (paired ?connector ?terminus)
    :max-per (?connector 3)
    :requires (and (bind (loc ?connector $connector-area))
                   (or (not (connector ?terminus))
                       (and (bind (loc ?terminus $terminus-area))
                            (different $connector-area $terminus-area)
                            (not (paired ?terminus ?connector))))))

  (define-base-filter filter-constraints
    (and (loc agent1 area4)
         (exists ((?c-blue ?c-red ?c-other) connector)
           (and (loc ?c-blue area2)
                (loc ?c-red area3)
                ...))))

Then, from the REPL:

  ;; Load the problem
  (stage "corner")

  ;; Step 1: Enumerate all goal states
  (find-goal-states)

  ;; Step 2: Expand backward reachable set
  (find-predecessors)
  ;; Answer 'y' at each layer prompt until saturation or desired depth

  ;; Step 3: Solve via meeting point
  (solve-meeting-point :depth-cutoff 12)

  ;; Inspect the result
  (solution.path (first *solutions*))
