TALOS TOPOLOGICAL RELATIONS

Dynamic relations

(active receiver)
(blowing fan)
(color connector $hue)
(crossing-active crossing)
(depressed plate)
(has-location mobile-object $location)
(holding agent $cargo)
(jamming jammer $target)
(lethal threat)
(mounted-on fan $gears)
(on support-occupant $support)
(open gate)
(paired connector terminus)
(turning gears)

Static relations

(aimed-at> gears $location)
(beam-crossing> crossing $beam-endpoint $beam-endpoint $beam-endpoint $beam-endpoint)
(beam-via transmitter $list receiver)
(boundary-wall $list)
(climb-via> location $list location)
(controls $list (either gate floor-gears wall-gears angled-gears) $mode)
(coupled transmitter receiver)
(crossings-along-beam> beam-endpoint $list beam-endpoint)
(crossings-before-gate> beam-endpoint $list gate beam-endpoint)
(current-crossings> $list)
(gate-segments $list)
(has-chroma (either transmitter receiver) $hue)
(has-elevation elevated-object $fixnum)
(has-height heighted-object $fixnum)
(has-position fixed-position-object $location)
(jam-disallowed> location location target)
(jump-via location $list location)
(jump-via> location $list location)
(location-coords> location $rational $rational)
(los-to-location location $list location)
(los-to-target location $list gate)
(los-to-apparatus location $list apparatus)
(reach-via location $list location)
(screen-segments $list)
(stream-width wall-gears $rational)
(threatens threat $list)
(apparatus-coords> (either transmitter receiver gun) $rational $rational)
(walk-via location $list location)
(walk-via> location $list location)
(wall-segments $list)
(welded fan $gears)
(window-segments $list)

Notes

walk-via and walk-via> values are DNF door-clause lists, the same convention as
controls: () means direct/unguarded; a nonempty value is OR over clauses, AND
within, e.g. ((gate1) (gate2 gate3)).  Clause items may be gates, screens,
ladders, or gears (a gears item is an air-stream crossing, passable unless a
blowing fan is mounted).  walk-via is symmetric; walk-via> is directional,
derived for rides into a stream's aimed-at> destination: from every zone
flanking the band across a side curtain, inbound to the destination unions
that zone's own family (step laterally into the flow and be carried there
while blowing, or walk across the dead band while off -- correct either way);
the reverse direction keeps its ordinary family.  A stream's swept location
belongs to the band's interior zone only, so every edge to it carries the
gears: it is standable exactly while the stream is off.  The front curtain
grants no ride -- walking in against the flow is an ordinary gears-gated
crossing.

walkable (?agent ?from ?to) is the Boolean predicate parallel to visible and
reachable.  walkable-locations (?agent ?from) computes the full walking
closure once for callers such as walk and beam-relay; one-step-walkable is
the per-edge predicate used to build that closure.  None of these includes
step, jump, or ladder transitions.

Air streams are derived, not authored: each wall-gears' band runs from the
solid backstop behind its fan through its has-position swept location to its
aimed-at> destination, 3 units wide unless a stream-width fact overrides.
boundary-wall participates in both the LOS derivation and the walk-via
derivation.

jamming's $target is a gate, gears, or gun: a jam always disables the barrier
or threat -- a jammed gate is forced open (update-gate-status!), jammed gears
are forced stopped (update-gears-status!), and a jammed gun is forced safe
(update-gun-status!).  A gate target's sightline comes from los-to-target
(gates span segments); a gears target's comes from its has-position location's
los-to-location entry, or trivially from the jammer's own location matching
it.  A gun target's sightline instead comes from los-to-apparatus, exactly
like a transmitter or receiver -- a gun is a point fixture positioned via
apparatus-coords>, not has-position, so there is no location it shares
with anything and no eql shortcut; jamming a gun is a line-of-sight check
only, whether hand-authored or derived from wall-segments.

threatens and lethal are threat's own two relations (-threat.lisp): threatens
is a static, per-instance list of the locations a threat instance endangers
while lethal; lethal is dynamic, asserted only by the owning threat
technology's own status update (gun's update-gun-status! for gun instances).
safe (?location) is true unless some currently-lethal threat threatens that
location.  jump's jump-to and ladder's use-ladder check it directly at their
own precondition, excluding an unsafe destination outright.  walkability
instead gates it inside one-step-walkable, the per-hop predicate
walkable-locations' BFS uses to expand its closure: walk is not a single hop -- it
offers any node in the whole closure as a one-shot destination -- so checking
safety only at walk's chosen destination would let an agent skip straight
past an armed threat to a safe location beyond it.  Gating it in
one-step-walkable excludes an unsafe location as a through-node as well as
an endpoint, so it can neither be walked into nor walked past.
The three blower updates do not check it themselves -- their physics stay
unconditional -- because a forced relocation has no precondition to gate in
the first place, and a location can also turn unsafe with no relocation at
all (a threat arming remotely while an agent already stands where it
reaches).  Instead, -threat.lisp's enforce-threat-safety! runs every
propagation pass and calls inconsistent-state (ww-planner.lisp) if any
agent's current location isn't safe, however it got there; the whole
resulting state is then dropped from the search rather than generated.  This
update is nested unconditionally by gun.lisp (and any future threat
technology), so the backstop is present whenever a threat exists, regardless
of which relocation technologies the problem includes.
