

LEDGER  REALIZATION LEDGER  [interactive-phase state for crelay-topo]
-------------------------------------------------------------
  SCOPE: a record of what is claimed and what it rests on.  It derives nothing.
  STANDING is computed from the dependency closure and never stored.  A record
  printed CONDITIONAL rests on at least one live guess or one cost bound.
  NOTE: RO prints "status CONDITIONAL" for what this reporter calls STANDING.
  This file's :STATUS is the stored lifecycle, which RO has no analogue for.

  OPEN LINKS (2)
    lk2  hold the aggregate open across the segment
      from: the three supports unoccupied
      to:   the three supports simultaneously occupied
      standing conditional; status open
      blocking premises (1):
        pr3  [user-asserted, in-force]  no ghost occupants exist in the segment under analysis
      premise gaps (3): necessity of this segment; replacement witnesses; recorder transitions
      would close: an action sequence found and validated under
        VALIDATE-ACTION-SEQUENCE, or a grade-1 or grade-2 derivation named
        in :CLOSED-BY.  No cost bound can close or refute it.
    lk4  cross the gap the spine requires
      from: the actor on the approach side
      to:   the actor on the far side
      standing established; status open
      blocking premises (0):
      attempt bd1: no realization of lk4 was found within depth 6 from the stated start state -- a cost bound, not a refutation
      attempt bd2: no realization of lk4 was found within 8 actions from the stated start state -- a cost bound, not a refutation
      would close: an action sequence found and validated under
        VALIDATE-ACTION-SEQUENCE, or a grade-1 or grade-2 derivation named
        in :CLOSED-BY.  No cost bound can close or refute it.

  SETTLED LINKS (0)

  PREMISES IN FORCE (2)
    pr1  standing established; status in-force  the normal aggregate requires three distinct supports depressed, and occupancy is keyed by occupant, so three distinct witnesses are necessary
    pr3  standing conditional; status in-force  no ghost occupants exist in the segment under analysis

  PREMISES DISCHARGED (0)

  COST BOUNDS  (GRADE 3 -- NOT IMPOSSIBILITY)  (2)
    bd1  attempted lk4; status standing
      exhausted at cutoff 6, threads 0, from: the staged state after the aggregate opens
      expression: (solve-subgoal ...) with *threads* 0
      grade 3: a cost bound relative to that start state.  It licenses no
        impossibility claim.
      committed before the run: success would close lk4 with its action sequence, subject to validation; exhaustion would establish a depth-6 cost bound relative to this start state and nothing more
      evidence: constraint-evidence/lk4-bound-2026-09-21.txt
      the cutoff truncated nothing: the reachable space from that start was exhausted within
        the cutoff.  Still a cost bound relative to that start, and still not an impossibility.
    bd2  attempted lk4; status standing
      exhausted at cutoff 8, threads 0, from: CHAIN
      expression: cutoff 8, threads 0, as recommended 2026-09-21
      grade 3: a cost bound relative to that start state.  It licenses no
        impossibility claim.
      committed before the run: an exhaustion is a GRADE-3 COST BOUND relative to the stated start state at cutoff 8.  It establishes that no realization of lk4 exists within 8 actions from that state, and nothing further: not that none exists deeper, not that lk4 is impossible, and not a refutation of any premise.  It is filed as a :BOUND record, which cannot close or refute a link.
      evidence: constraint-evidence/lk4-bound-8-2026-09-21.txt
      the cutoff truncated the space: nodes with successors were cut off, so this covers strictly less
        than the reachable space from that start.
      pruning in force: repeated-state pruning in graph mode.  An exhaustion under pruning excludes solutions in pruned branches.

  OPEN QUESTIONS (10)
    qn2  standing established; status open  does a support transition preserve occupancy across a cycle boundary?
    qn3  standing established; status open  Does the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports occur in every solution, or only in some?
    qn4  standing established; status open  In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, do any ghost occupants exist?
    qn5  standing established; status open  In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, does the agent occupy any of the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8)?
    qn6  standing established; status open  In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, can a witness removed from a required support be replaced by another before the aggregate is read?
    qn7  standing established; status open  Can a recorder cycle boundary occur within the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports?
    qn8  standing established; status open  For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), can every available witness reach every one of them?
    qn9  standing established; status open  For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), does elevation admit every witness-to-support pairing?
    qn10  standing established; status open  For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), does occupancy history admit every witness-to-support pairing?
    qn11  standing established; status open  In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, which of the present occupants (ww::b1 ww::b2 ww::b3 ww::b4) are actually available as witnesses?

  ANSWERED QUESTIONS (1)
    qn1  standing established; status answered  are ghosts present in the segment under analysis?

  RETRACTED OR REFUTED PREMISES (0)

  INVALIDATED LINKS (0)

  no obligation, no necessity and no plan witness is derived by this component.


RECOMMENDED SEARCHES  [for crelay-topo]
--------------------------------------------------------------
  SCOPE: what to run and what each outcome would establish.  It runs nothing.
  Every reading below was written BEFORE its run, which is what stops an
  exhaustion from being reinterpreted once its outcome is known.

  OPEN LINKS (2)
    lk2  hold the aggregate open across the segment
      standing conditional; rests on pr1, pr3
      NO RECOMMENDATION COMMITTED.  Call RECOMMEND-LEDGER-SEARCH on lk2 first.
    lk4  cross the gap the spine requires
      standing established; rests on pr1
      run, in order:
        (progn (ql:quickload :wouldwork) (in-package :ww))
        (stage crelay-topo)
        (ww-set *threads* 0)
        (ww-set *depth-cutoff* 8)
        (solve-subgoal (and (has-location agent1 location19)))
      cautions:
        staging resets settings and state, so set the parameters after (stage ...).
        crossing the serial/parallel boundary with (ww-set *threads* ...) rebuilds the system.
        the goal is unquoted by design; a quoted goal installs (quote ...), read as trivially true.
        *depth-cutoff* 0 or negative means no cutoff at all, which is why it is set explicitly.
        the one-argument form is goal chaining, which the engine runs at *threads* 0 only.
      committed 2026-09-21, before the run:
        success:    a found action sequence realizes lk4 from the stated start within 8 actions.  It makes lk4 :REALIZED.  It CLOSES lk4 only once VALIDATE-ACTION-SEQUENCE accepts the composition, and the closure then still stands on 0 live premise(s).  It establishes nothing about any other link.
        exhaustion: an exhaustion is a GRADE-3 COST BOUND relative to the stated start state at cutoff 8.  It establishes that no realization of lk4 exists within 8 actions from that state, and nothing further: not that none exists deeper, not that lk4 is impossible, and not a refutation of any premise.  It is filed as a :BOUND record, which cannot close or refute a link.
      DEEPENING: bd1 measured this link to cutoff 6; this run raises it to 8.
        The earlier bound is not superseded until a new bound is filed against the same start state.

  a recommendation is not an approval to run it.


SCHEMA-GAP CANDIDATES  [for crelay-topo]  (1)
--------------------------------------------------------------
  M5: a surprising outcome is a question the schema failed to ask.  Append these
  to the problem's Constraint-Schema-Gaps.txt BY HAND, stated domain-generally.
  Nothing here writes to that file.

    qn2  blocks lk4
      question: does a support transition preserve occupancy across a cycle boundary?
      candidate answers: :yes, :no, :depends-on-the-view
      raised by: surprise while ingesting a run for lk4


QUESTIONS  [for crelay-topo]
--------------------------------------------------------------
  Each of these is a premise the analysis could not settle.  Answer from
  intuition; the default is :unknown and costs nothing.
  AN ANSWER IS A PREMISE, NOT A FINDING.  It is filed as user-asserted, and
  everything resting on it reads CONDITIONAL for as long as it stands.

  OPEN (10)

    qn2  [one-of]
      blocks lk4
      does a support transition preserve occupancy across a cycle boundary?
        1. :yes
        2. :no
        3. :depends-on-the-view
        4. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: surprise while ingesting a run for lk4
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn2 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn3  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      Does the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports occur in every solution, or only in some?
        1. :occurs-in-every-solution
        2. :occurs-in-some-solution-only
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: RO allocates inside a stated segment; it never establishes that the segment occurs. An answer here is a premise, not a finding.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn3 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn4  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, do any ghost occupants exist?
        1. :no-ghost-occupants-exist
        2. :ghost-occupants-exist
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: S2 makes occupancy layer-blind, so a ghost depresses a support exactly as a live body does. This changes the size of the pool, not the matching rule.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn4 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn5  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, does the agent occupy any of the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8)?
        1. :agent-occupies-none-of-them
        2. :agent-occupies-one-of-them
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: The agent is one of the occupants. Whether it is spent on a support decides whether the remaining pool can cover the rest.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn5 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn6  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, can a witness removed from a required support be replaced by another before the aggregate is read?
        1. :a-replacement-witness-exists
        2. :no-replacement-witness-exists
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: Removing the last eligible witness closes the device in the same propagation. Whether a replacement exists is what separates a momentary loss from a lasting one, and RO does not decide it.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn6 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn7  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      Can a recorder cycle boundary occur within the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports?
        1. :a-cycle-boundary-can-occur
        2. :no-cycle-boundary-occurs-here
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: A boundary removes ghost state and normalizes the shadow, so it changes the available pool mid-segment. No extractor reads the cycle structure; that is G8, and this question is the hand reading it asks for.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn7 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn8  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), can every available witness reach every one of them?
        1. :every-available-witness-can-reach-every-support
        2. :some-witness-support-pair-is-out-of-reach
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: RO's eligibility restricts by availability alone and says so at the claim site. Reach is the first of the three restrictions it leaves open.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn8 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn9  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), does elevation admit every witness-to-support pairing?
        1. :elevation-admits-every-pairing
        2. :some-pairing-is-blocked-by-elevation
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: The second restriction RO leaves open. S5 is not written, so this is a hand reading until it is.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn9 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn10  [one-of]
      blocks lk2
      For the required supports (ww::s6 ww::s7 ww::s8), does occupancy history admit every witness-to-support pairing?
        1. :occupancy-history-admits-every-pairing
        2. :some-pairing-is-excluded-by-history
        3. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: The third restriction RO leaves open. A body that was never where it would have to start from is not eligible, however available it is.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn10 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

    qn11  [subset-of]
      blocks lk2
      In the segment described as physical view, no ghosts, the aggregate open, agent off those supports, which of the present occupants (ww::b1 ww::b2 ww::b3 ww::b4) are actually available as witnesses?
        1. ww::b1
        2. ww::b2
        3. ww::b3
        4. ww::b4
        5. :unknown  -- the default; it writes no premise and leaves this open
      why it matters: Presence is not availability. A declared type extent states who exists, not who is free; an absent answer leaves RO reporting demand only.
      answer with: (answer-ledger-question ledger 'qn11 <answer> "<the premise in your words>" "D")

  ANSWERED (1)
    qn1  absent -> premise pr3; standing established

  answering settles what rests on the answer, never that the answer is true.
