B2 revised box-retrieval analysis -- 2026-09-22
===============================================

AUTHORIZATION AND SCOPE
D approved read-only derivation after the B2 construction audit. This analysis
uses the preserved B1 endpoint, the authored crelay-topo geometry, and the
permitted movement, support, switch, blower, cargo, gate, and recorder
semantics. No Lisp, staging, import, search, replay, validation, extractor,
test, engine edit, or instance edit ran. No sealed material was read. This is
the exposed session already disclosed in the preceding handoff, not a clean
prediction experiment.

CONCLUSION
The revised construction cannot be completed from the current authored
locations and objects. A valid B2 must first supply an independent elevated
standing/support configuration at the gate2 approach; the existing blower
does not supply one that survives opening gate2. Once that missing resource is
provided, the remaining box retrieval and second fork can be stated
conditionally. This is a construction boundary, not an impossibility proof
and not a runtime recommendation.

1. REQUIRED B2 POSTCONDITION
Starting at the preserved B1 endpoint:

  - tray1 is on plate1, keeping physical and recording gate1 open;
  - agent1 is at location1, empty-handed;
  - box1 is at location6;
  - the first recorder cycle is closed and ghost-free.

The intended second-cycle boundary remains:

  (and (recording-in-progress)
       (on tray1 plate1)
       (on box1 plate2)
       (on tray1* plate1)
       (on box1* plate2)
       (has-location agent1 location1)
       (has-location agent1* location1))

The goal deliberately does not impose a cycle-count equality. A successful
construction must inspect the actual cycle count and both live/ghost holding
states before treating this boundary as established.

2. NON-NEGOTIABLE ELEVATION SUBGOAL
The authored jump edges into location6 start at locations4, 5, and 20.
Locations4 and 5 are level0; location6 is level3/2; the jump-rise limit is1.
Therefore neither ground approach can land at location6. The only authored
approach whose launch elevation meets the landing test is location20 at
level3/2. Equal-level walking does not create another route into the alcove.

The revised B2 therefore needs, before pickup:

  (and (has-location agent1 location20)
       (= (location-elevation location20) 3/2)
       (switch1 state that leaves gate2 open)
       (an independent support or transition that retains agent1 at that
        elevation after the lift is no longer active))

The last clause is the missing premise. It is not supplied by the current
problem.

3. WHY THE EXISTING BLOWER CANNOT DISCHARGE THAT SUBGOAL
Switch1 controls blower1 normally and gate2 inversely. Turning switch1 on can
make the blower launch an occupant from location4 to location20, but it also
closes gate2. At location20, turning switch1 off opens gate2 but immediately
stops the blower; DROP-OCCUPANTS! then returns an unsupported actor to
location4. The actor cannot take the next gate2 jump while retaining the
level3/2 launch position.

A ghost toggle does not repair this boundary: ghost switching changes the
physical switch as well as its recording-side switch. A recording-only gate
view cannot substitute for the live actor's physical gate2 crossing. A box or
tray placed at the blower destination is likewise not an established
solution, because it requires reaching that destination first and is itself
subject to the same drop propagation when unsupported.

4. CONDITIONAL CARGO LEG
If an independent elevated standing/support configuration is established at
location20 while switch1 is off and gate2 is open, the remaining cargo leg is:

  a. move agent1 from that elevated approach through the open gate2 to
     location6;
  b. PICKUP-BOX box1 at location6;
  c. return through the same legal elevated route while carrying box1;
  d. PUT-BOX box1 on plate2;
  e. return empty-handed to recorder1;
  f. START-RECORDER.

The pickup step still requires horizontal reach, a clear box top, and no
existing holding. The return route must be checked with the carried-box
state; the route cannot be inferred merely from the outbound jump. The
placement must be a legal reachable placement on plate2. The final START-
RECORDER requires the live agent to be at recorder1, empty-handed, and the
prior cycle to be closed and ghost-free. At that moment it copies tray1 and
box1 onto plate1 and plate2, respectively.

These are conditional action classes, not an action count. No six-action or
other length estimate is retained.

5. WHAT WOULD COUNT AS A REALIZED REPLACEMENT
A future candidate may close B2 only if it demonstrates, from B1, all of:

  - a legal transition to an elevated gate2 approach;
  - retention of that elevation while gate2 is open in the actor's own view;
  - legal entry to location6 and pickup of box1;
  - a legal carried-box return and placement on plate2;
  - empty-handed return to recorder1;
  - a legal second START-RECORDER fork with tray1* on plate1 and box1* on
    plate2, with the observed cycle count and holding states recorded.

An additional location is not by itself sufficient. It would need a measured
or authored legal transition into the required level and a propagation-safe
support boundary. No such location or transition is proposed here.

6. STATUS AND LIMITS
The current B2 search remains a grade-3 bound for its exact B1 start, goal,
cutoff12, threads16, GRAPH, symmetry NIL, and minimum-steps pruning settings.
This derivation neither explains all cutoff hits nor proves B2 unreachable.
It rejects only the prior six-action construction as a complete mechanism.
B3 and B4 remain conditional on a realized cargo-fork endpoint. No new search,
replay, validation, checkpoint, ledger link, or grade is created by this
analysis.

7. ELEVATION-RESOURCE AUDIT
The permitted authored elevation changes do not provide an independent B2
resource. The three named jump edges into location6 all require the same
level-3/2 landing test; only location20 can satisfy it. The other authored
elevation technologies are ladders at locations3, 8, and 11, whose endpoints
do not enter the gate2 alcove or location20. Step transitions on plates and
blowers change support configuration but do not create a retained elevated
landing; the blower's retained height is explicitly conditional on its active
view.

The movable supports cannot bootstrap this missing state from B1. Box1 is the
unreachable cargo at location6. Tray1 is on plate1 and a grounded tray is
inert; carrying it does not create a self-mountable support for its holder.
Recorder ghosts are unavailable at B1's closed boundary, and a later ghost
fork copies existing support state rather than creating an independent
elevation transition. Consequently the current object inventory contains no
source-derived elevation resource that can be established before the box
pickup.

This audit leaves only two honest future branches: supply a separately
justified authored/instance location and transition that reaches and retains
the required level, or close the B2 construction branch. Adding a location
coordinate alone would not meet the obligation unless the derived movement
graph also supplies a legal launch and propagation-safe support. No such
addition is proposed here.

8. BRANCH CLOSURE
D closed the B2 construction branch after this audit. The six-action route
remains withdrawn, the exact cutoff-12 result remains a grade-3 bound, and no
runtime operation follows from this file. B3/B4 and deferred T11 remain
unapproved. A later task would need a separately justified new elevation
resource before reopening this branch.

SOURCES
Constraint-Implementation-Plan.md; Constraint-Continuation-Prompt.txt;
Constraint-Restart-Checkpoint.txt; b2-construction-audit-2026-09-22.txt;
b2-baseline-proposal-2026-09-22.txt; b2-baseline-result-2026-09-22.txt;
recorder-baseline-staged-construction-2026-09-22.txt;
probs/problem-crelay-topo.lisp lines 95-113, 136-137, 168, 179-182;
tech/jump.lisp; tech/-mobility-action.lisp; tech/step.lisp; tech/switch.lisp;
tech/-floor-blowing.lisp; tech/box.lisp; tech/-pickup.lisp;
tech/-recorder-session.lisp.
